Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page i

Praise for

Do Hard Things
“Do Hard Things is an extraordinary book. In fact, I believe it
will prove to be one of the most life-changing, family-changing,
church-changing, and culture-changing books of this generation. I’d love for every teenager to read this book, but I’m just
as eager for every parent, church leader, and educator to read it.
If you do the hard thing of saying no to distractions and yes to
this remarkable book, I guarantee you’ll be richly rewarded.”
—RANDY ALCORN, best-selling author of Heaven
and The Treasure Principle

“Adult expectations for youth are too low. And these twins are
out to raise them. Don’t adapt to the low cultural expectations for youth. Set high ones. Youth can become examples
for adults. Think that way. Dream that way. Or as the Harris
brothers would say, ‘Rebel against low expectations.’ May God
give us a vision for the next generation that glorifies the gospel
of Christ and leads thousands of young people to the cross,
where they find forgiveness of sins, broken-hearted humility,
and Christ-exalting courage to rebel against low expectations
and do hard things.”
—JOHN PIPER, Desiring God Ministries and best-selling
author of Don’t Waste Your Life

“Do Hard Things is so important. It is challenging teenagers to
rebel against the low expectations placed on them, not the
least of which are low spiritual expectations. And the voices
that are asking teens to rise to meet this challenge are voices

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page ii

from their own generation. That thrills me. If you’ve got a
teenager—or a grandson or granddaughter—I encourage you
to pick up a copy of Do Hard Things. It would make a great
graduation present or summer reading. And don’t just give
them the book; make a point to ramp up your interaction
with the teens God has put in your life. Become a spiritual
mentor and help them rebel against low expectations. Help
them become rebels with a good cause, seeking more out of
life than mindless channel-surfing.”
—CHUCK COLSON, founder of Prison Fellowship
and best-selling author of How Now Shall We Live?

“Do Hard Things is easy to read, but it will challenge you to the
core. It is inspiring, insightful, and practical. Parents, this book
will get your teens into the right kind of trouble—the kind that
comes when they dream, take risks for God, and dare to flout
the status quo. Put it in their hands. Read it yourself. It’s never
too late to do hard things.”
—JOSHUA HARRIS, pastor, author, and older brother
“Alex and Brett Harris are two extraordinary young men with
a revolutionary message. In a culture where laziness and ease
is often the order of the day for teenagers, Do Hard Things presents a radical and provocative alternative. I heartily recommend this book.”
—R. ALBERT MOHLER JR., president of Southern Baptist
Theological Seminary

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page iii

“This book is a refreshing wake-up call to our generation. We
can do hard things and give ourselves to something huge for
the kingdom of God!”
—LEELAND MOORING, Grammy-nominated
recording artist

“This book will create a distinct distaste in your soul for living
an easy and comfortable life. I pray that God will use this
book to inspire many young people (and old alike!) to do hard
things by God’s grace for the glory of His name.”
—C. J. MAHANEY, Sovereign Grace Ministries, author of Living
the Cross-Centered Life and Humility: True Greatness

“Alex and Brett capture the passion and potential of our generation perfectly in this book. In Do Hard Things, they encourage us to go above and beyond the status quo in everything
from schoolwork to serving the poor. This is a truly unique
and sorely needed book.”
—ZACH HUNTER, abolitionist and author of Be the Change,
age 16

“Do Hard Things is exactly the message our generation needs to
hear. This book challenges us to stop and recall the things God
has put in our hearts to do and take time to do them now. Let’s
address the low expectations and call our generation to rise up
and see what the Lord can do when we do hard things.”
—BARLOWGIRL, recording artist

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page iv

“This is an important book. And not just for those wanting to
launch successfully into adulthood, but also for discontented
twenty- and thirty-somethings who long to be catapulted into
significance. The propositions in this book are neither wishful thinking about what could be nor a wistful reflection on
how things used to be. The Harris brothers demonstrate with
their lives and through the examples of countercultural
dream-big teens around the world that young adults can
achieve great things and live rich, intentional, excellent, and
meaningful lives.”
—TED SLATER, editor of Boundless, Focus
on the Family

“Alex and Brett Harris are leading the way for the fight to save
their generation, and in Do Hard Things they are beckoning
others to join them. I pray that teenagers will listen to their
cry and join them on the front lines.”
—RON LUCE, founder of Teen Mania Ministries
and author of Battle Cry for a Generation

“If you are a young person who wants to affect this world for
Jesus Christ, read this book! I have watched Alex and Brett take
on new and daunting endeavors with resolve and determination and, as a result, mature and develop into leaders for this
generation and an example for all generations of reaching to
fulfill your full potential in and for Christ.”
—JUSTICE TOM PARKER, Alabama Supreme Court

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page v

“Alex and Brett are the real deal, and Do Hard Things is a real
wake-up call not just for young people but for all God’s people. I can’t recommend it highly enough.”
—SHANNON ETHRIDGE, best-selling author of Every Young
Woman’s Battle and Completely His

“Add years to your life! This book is a how-to guide for recovering the years thirteen to nineteen. It’s a good read—the
trap of low expectations, the danger of leisure, surprising
stories—this is stirring stuff! Do Hard Things is a winning combination of optimism and challenge.”
—MARK DEVER, pastor of Capitol Hill Baptist Church
and founder of 9Marks.org

“Do Hard Things is the textbook for anyone who works with
teens; it’s a philosophical and foundational must-read.”
—TIMOTHY ELDRED, executive director of Christian
Endeavor International

“As a university professor, I am well aware of the Gen Y propensity to demand more recognition for less effort and to associate
self-esteem with mere being rather than for actual accomplishment. Do Hard Things is a call to teenagers everywhere to
channel their energy into world-changing activity with eternal
significance. I highly recommend it.”
—DR. ALEX CHEDIAK, associate professor of engineering at
California Baptist University and author of With One Voice

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page vi

“Our generation is filled with apathetic, complacent, and immature wimps. By contrast, Brett and Alex are leaders in our
generation, and their message is that you can be too.”
—HANS ZEIGER, author of Reagan’s Children
and Get Off My Honor

“The simple title, Do Hard Things, in one sense summarizes
the high-energy, cheerleader-like optimism of the book’s pages.
Just do it! Do it! Do it! The argument is buttressed with stories
and anecdotes to encourage the faint-hearted. But this book’s
foundations are much, much deeper. By their words and by
their example, the Harris twins are provoking Christian teenagers to raise their sights. If I have any reservations about Alex
and Brett’s book, such doubts are less about them and more
about the readiness of the evangelical culture to hear and respond to such a heady, serious challenge. But that, of course,
is exactly what this is all about—a couple of nineteen-yearolds, wise beyond their years, asking the rest of us to do hard
things.”
—JOEL BELZ, founder of World Magazine
To read endorsements from real teens, parents,
and youth workers, visit TheRebelution.com

Excerpted from Do Hard Things by Alex and Brett Harris Copyright © 2016 by Alex
and Brett Harris. Excerpted by permission of WaterBrook & Multnomah, imprints of
Penguin Random House, LLC. All rights reserved. No part of this excerpt may be
reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher.

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page vii

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page viii

DO HARD THINGS
PUBLISHED BY MULTNOMAH BOOKS
12265 Oracle Boulevard, Suite 200
Colorado Springs, CO 80921
All Scripture quotations, unless otherwise indicated, are taken from the ESV® Bible
(the Holy Bible, English Standard Version®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing ministry of Good News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved. Scripture quotations marked (MSG) are taken from the Message. Copyright © by Eugene H.
Peterson 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 2000, 2001, 2002. Used by permission of Tyndale
House Publishers Inc. Scripture quotations marked (NIV) are taken from the Holy Bible,
New International Version®, NIV®. Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984 by Biblica Inc.®
Used by permission. All rights reserved worldwide.
Italics in Scripture quotations indicate the authors’ added emphasis.
The stories featuring teenagers in this book have been used by permission.
Trade Paperback ISBN 978-1-60142-829-5
Hardcover ISBN 978-1-60142-112-8
eBook ISBN 978-1-60142-161-6
Copyright ” 2008, 2013 by Alex Harris and Brett Harris
Foreword copyright © 2008 by Chuck Norris
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from
the publisher.
Published in the United States by WaterBrook Multnomah, an imprint of the Crown
Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
MULTNOMAH® and its mountain colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin
Random House LLC.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:
Harris, Alex, 1988–
Do hard things : a teenage rebellion against low expectations / by Alex and Brett
Harris. — 1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-60142-112-8
1. Self-actualization (Psychology)—Religious aspects—Christianity. 2. Self-actualization
(Psychology) in adolescence. 3. Expectation—Religious aspects—Christianity. 4. Adolescent psychology. I. Harris, Brett, 1988– II. Title.
BV4598.2.H36 2008
248.8’3—dc22
2008006226
Printed in the United States of America
2016—First Trade Paperback Edition
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
SPECIAL SALES
Most WaterBrook Multnomah books are available in special quantity discounts when
purchased in bulk by corporations, organizations, and special interest groups. Custom
imprinting or excerpting can also be done to fit special needs. For information, please
e-mail SpecialMarkets@WaterBrookMultnomah.com or call 1-800-603-7051.

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page ix

To our parents, Gregg and Sono Harris.
This book is the message of your lives.
Our triumph is your triumph. We love you.

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xi

Contents
Foreword by Chuck Norris . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Introduction to the Five-Year Edition: Looking Back,
Looking Ahead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv

Pa r t 1
r et h i n k i n g t h e t e e n Y e a r s
1

Most People Don’t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
A different kind of teen book

2

The Birth of a Big Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Rumblings of a rebelution

3

The Myth of Adolescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Exposing the low expectations that are robbing
our generation

4

A Better Way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Reclaiming the teen years as the launching pad of life

Pa r t 2
Five kinds oF hard
5

That First Scary Step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
How to do hard things that take you outside your
comfort zone

6

Raising the Bar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
How to do hard things that go beyond what’s
expected or required

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xii

contents

7

The Power of Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
How to do hard things that are too big for you
to do alone

8

Small Hard Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
How to do hard things that don’t pay off
immediately

9

Taking a Stand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
How to do hard things that go against the crowd

Pa r t 3
Join the rebelution
10

Generation Rising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Creating a counterculture from scratch
(and a dash of salt)

11

A Thousand Young Heroes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
Stories of new beginnings, impossible challenges,
and the teens who are living them

12

World, Meet Your Rebelutionaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
Transforming your mission from a decision into
a destiny

Afterword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Appendix A: Do Hard Things, the Gospel, and You . . . . . 243
Appendix B: Questions (and Stories) to Get You
Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
Appendix C: 100 Hard Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263
Appendix D: Conversation Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289

xii

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xiii

Foreword
bY ChuCk norris

A

s a young man, I discovered the power of doing hard
things. Abject poverty, a father’s alcoholism and deser-

tion of our family, and my own shyness were a few of the
obstacles I faced and overcame growing up. My mother
always told me, “God has a plan for your life.” And she’s right.
Each of us is called to reach for greatness. There really is a hero
in all of us. We’ve all been designed by God to be a blessing
to many—a hero to some.
But there’s only one way to get there—it’s described by
the title of this book: Do Hard Things.
Today we live in a culture that promotes comfort, not
challenges. Everything is about finding ways to escape hardship, avoid pain, and dodge duty. In the past, young people
were expected to make significant contributions to society.
Today, our culture expects very little from teens—not much
more than staying in school and doing a few chores. A sad
consequence of such low expectations is that life-changing
lessons go unlearned.
To whom can we turn to motivate a new generation of
giants? I’ve found the answer. Alex and Brett Harris and their
book, Do Hard Things.
I know the twins personally and can vouch for their
integrity and wisdom. I’ve seen their passion to raise up a new
xiii

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xiv

Foreword

generation of tough-spirited young people. They are amazing
young men, uniquely qualified to inspire others to reach for
great things.
One of my life’s principles is to develop myself to the
maximum of my potential in all ways and to help others do
the same. Brett and Alex come straight from the same mold,
but with an even greater potential to reach young people
around the world.
Their book is far more than a typical how-to book. From
an insightful historical overview of the teen years to personal
plans for helping teens hurdle tough obstacles, the authors
sound a battle cry to raise the cultural bar on teenage potential and to challenge young people to reach for their Godgiven best.
Do Hard Things will help recruit, develop, and deploy a
new generation of young culture warriors. With God’s help,
the book you’re holding will usher in an era in which it can
once again be said of our youth, “I write to you, young men,
because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you,
and you have overcome the evil one” (1 John 2:14).
Start reading now. Then do hard things!
—Chuck Norris
www.chucknorris.com

xiv

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xv

Introduction to the Five-Year Edition

looking baCk ,
looking ahead

O

nly yesterday, it seems, two teenage brothers got excited

about a big idea that young people were being under-

estimated—badly, and with devastating consequences. What
made it worse, the brothers believed, was that a whole generation of teens had bought into a culture of low expectations.
Kids everywhere were essentially being groomed for failure
before they had ever been tested for success. Before they’d ever
been invited to set their minds, wills, and hearts on making a
mark for God in the world.
How tragic!

xv

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xvi

Introduction

And history showed it didn’t have to be that way. History
showed, in fact, that the teen years were meant to be a season
of daring, of high hopes and real achievements, a one-timeonly opportunity for a guy or girl to set a course for a truly
remarkable life.
The brothers—okay, that would be us, Alex and Brett—
came up with a plan to change all that, then invited other
young people and their parents to join in. And that was the
beginning of the Rebelution.
What a difference five years have made! What started as a
blog (TheRebelution.com) became a best-selling book, Do
Hard Things, which led to youth conferences around the
country every summer. And all of that, by God’s grace and a
lot of hard work, had spawned an international youth movement with this red book as its manifesto.
To date, Do Hard Things has been translated into over a
dozen languages, including French, Korean, Czech, and Portuguese, sparking sister campaigns in Europe, Asia, and South
America. Young people from New York to Los Angeles, from
São Paulo to Manila, are rebelling against low expectations for
the glory of God.
“Regards from snowy Poland,” reads a recent e-mail from
sisters Kornelia and Eunika Chojeckie. They wrote to say they
had just finished a “do hard things” presentation in Lublin.
The Chojeckie sisters are two of the founding members
of a Rebelution-inspired youth campaign spreading across

xvi

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xvii

Looking Back, Looking Ahead

Eastern Europe. They’re sponsoring events and a growing,
multilingual social networking site with users from Poland,
Hungary, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova, and Kazakhstan.
Here in the United States, rebelutionaries have raised hundreds of thousands of dollars for missions and charity, won
prestigious film festivals, earned Grammy Award nominations,
fought human trafficking around the world, and been invited
to speak at the White House on multiple occasions.
“Do hard things” is slowly entering the national consciousness, making cameo appearances in ESPN The Magazine,
nationally syndicated comic strips, blockbuster feature films,
as well as in the speeches of major political leaders from Senator John McCain to President Barack Obama.
But the true engine of the Rebelution has been the steady,
long-term faithfulness of thousands of young people you’ve
never heard of, quietly stepping outside their comfort zones,
going beyond what is expected or required, investing their
teenage and college years in undertakings of real and lasting
consequence, and never backing down from hard things
worth doing.
Across the globe—from Parisian neighborhoods to Ivy
League classrooms—a generation of rebels is rising through
steady, one-foot-after-the-other, daily obedience to Jesus Christ.
This is a quiet, worldwide revolution, and you’re invited. Our
mantra is “do hard things,” and our mission statement is
1 Timothy 4:12, “Don’t let anyone look down on you because

xvii

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xviii

Introduction

you are young, but set an example for the believers in speech,
in life, in love, in faith and in purity” (NIV).
We were eighteen when we wrote Do Hard Things. Since
then we’ve been able to travel and speak in dozens of major
cities in the United States, Canada, Switzerland, and Japan—
reaching hundreds of thousands of teens, parents, and youth
workers through live events and media appearances. We’ve
been able to preach the gospel to our generation and seen
thousands of bold professions of faith in Jesus Christ. We’ve
written another book called Start Here, a field guide for putting
the “do hard things” mind-set into practice.
We attended and graduated from college (Patrick Henry
College, Purcellville, Virginia), becoming the first in our
immediate family to do so. We watched our mother bravely
battle cancer and go to be with Jesus on July 4, 2010. We’ve
fought our own personal battles against sin, wrestled through
questions of calling, and for long stretches of time, stepped
out of the limelight to just practice what we preach.
And we both got married—Alex to Courtney, and Brett
to Ana. All together, the last five years have been the most
significant and challenging years of our lives. We’ve been
stretched, pushed, and strengthened. We haven’t backed
down, and we haven’t let up. It’s been hard—and it’s been
good.
Which brings us to the fifth anniversary edition you’re
holding. When WaterBrook Multnomah approached us about

xviii

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xix

Looking Back, Looking Ahead

an update, we were faced with some important questions:
How do you update something without changing it? How do
you offer something new without compromising what made
the old so effective?
In the end, we opted for a conservative approach, leaving
the original content untouched while adding new material as
appendixes. It’s the same book, but better. And whether you’re
a first-time reader or a long-time rebelutionary, we think you’ll
really like it.
This new content begins with “Questions (and Stories) to
Get You Started,” which delves into the queries we hear most
often:
• “I’m ready to get started—on something! What should
I do now?”
• “Do small hard things really count?”
Next you’ll find the list “100 Hard Things” to get your
own creative juices flowing. These are real-life examples of
hard things young people just like you have done—from
making care packages for members of the military, to starting
an after-school Bible study, to training for and running a
marathon.
Finally, we’ve included a Do Hard Things study guide for
personal or group use, along with information about downloadable video resources we created with LifeChurch.tv.
We think you’ll find these new tools helpful and
encouraging as you champion the vision of teenage high

xix

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page xx

Introduction

expectations in your area and apply your heart, mind, and
strength to the adventure ahead.
G. K. Chesterton once wrote, “The Christian ideal has not
been tried and found wanting. It has been found difficult; and
left untried.” Our hope and prayer is that you would join us
in doing hard things, that together we would be the generation of Christian young people who find it difficult to follow
hard after Christ…and yet still try.
Together for His glory,
Alex and Brett Harris

xx

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 1

Part 1

rethinking the
teen Years

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 3

1

Most PeoPle don’t
a different kind of teen book

M

ost people don’t expect you to understand what we’re
going to tell you in this book. And even if you under-

stand, they don’t expect you to care. And even if you care,
they don’t expect you to do anything about it. And even if
you do something about it, they don’t expect it to last.
Well, we do.
This is a different kind of teen book. Check online or walk
through your local bookstore. You’ll find plenty of books

3

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 4

rethinking the teen years

written by fortysomethings who, like, totally understand what
it’s like being a teenager. You’ll find a lot of cheap throwaway
books for teens because young people today aren’t supposed
to care about books or see any reason to keep them around.
And you’ll find a wide selection of books where you never have
to read anything twice—because the message is dumbed-down.
Like, just for you.
What you’re holding in your hands right now is a challenging book for teens by teens who believe our generation is
ready for a change. Ready for something that doesn’t promise
a whole new life if you’ll just buy the right pair of jeans or use
the right kind of deodorant. We believe our generation is
ready to rethink what teens are capable of doing and becoming. And we’ve noticed that once wrong ideas are debunked
and cleared away, our generation is quick to choose a better
way, even if it’s also more difficult.
We’re nineteen-year-old twin brothers, born and raised in
Oregon, taught at home by our parents, and striving to follow
Christ as best we can. We’ve made more than our share of mistakes. And although we don’t think “average teenagers” exist,
there is nothing all that extraordinary about us personally.
Still, we’ve had some extraordinary experiences. At age
sixteen, we interned at the Alabama Supreme Court. At seventeen, we served as grass-roots directors for four statewide
political campaigns. At eighteen, we authored the most popular Christian teen blog on the web. We’ve been able to speak

4

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 5

Most people don’t

to thousands of teens and their parents at conferences in
the United States and internationally and to reach millions
online. But if our teen years have been different than most, it’s
not because we’re somehow better than other teens, but
because we’ve been motivated by a simple but very big idea.
It’s an idea you’re going to encounter for yourself in the pages
ahead.
We’ve seen this idea transform “average” teenagers into
world-changers able to accomplish incredible things. And
they started by simply being willing to break the mold of what
society thinks teens are capable of.
So even though the story starts with us, this book really
isn’t about us, and we would never want it to be. It’s about
something God is doing in the hearts and minds of our generation. It’s about an idea. It’s about rebelling against low
expectations. It’s about a movement that is changing the attitudes and actions of teens around the world. And we want
you to be part of it.
This book invites you to explore some radical questions:
• Is it possible that even though teens today have more
freedom than any other generation in history, we’re
actually missing out on some of the best years of our
lives?
• Is it possible that what our culture says about the purpose and potential of the teen years is a lie and that
we are its victims?

5

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 6

rethinking the teen years

• Is it possible that our teen years give us a once-in-alifetime opportunity for huge accomplishments—as
individuals and as a generation?
• And finally, what would our lives look like if we set
out on a different path entirely—a path that required
more effort but promised a lot more reward?
We describe that alternative path with three simple words:
“do hard things.”
If you’re like most people, your first reaction to the phrase
“do hard things” runs along the lines of, “Hard? Uh-oh. Guys,
I just remembered that I’m supposed to be somewhere else.
Like, right now.”
We understand this reaction. It reminds us of a story we
like to tell about a group of monks. Yep, monks.
On the outskirts of a small town in Germany is the imaginary abbey of Dundelhoff. This small stone monastery is
home to a particularly strict sect of Dundress monks, who
have each vowed to live a life of continual self-denial and
discomfort.
Instead of wearing comfy T-shirts and well-worn jeans like
most people, these monks wear either itchy shirts made from
goat hair or cold chain mail worn directly over bare skin.
Instead of soft mattresses, pillows, and warm blankets, they
sleep on the cold stone floors of the abbey. You might have
read somewhere that monks are fabulous cooks? Well, not

6

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 7

Most people don’t

these monks. They eat colorless, tasteless sludge—once a day.
They only drink lukewarm water.
We could go on, but you get the picture. No matter what
decision they face, Dundress monks always choose the more
difficult option, the one that provides the least physical comfort, holds the least appeal, offers the least fun. Why? Because
they believe that the more miserable they are, the holier they
are; and the holier they are, the happier God is.
So these miserable monks must be poster boys for “do
hard things.” Right?
Wrong!
We’re not plotting to make your life miserable. We’re not
recommending that you do any and every difficult thing. For
example, we’re not telling you to rob a bank, jump off a cliff,
climb Half Dome with your bare hands, or stand on your head
for twenty-four hours straight. We are not telling you to do
pointless (or stupid) hard things just because they’re hard.
And if you’re a Christian, we’re certainly not telling you that
if you work harder or make yourself uncomfortable on purpose, God will love you more. He will never—could never—
love you any more than He does right now.
So that’s what we’re not doing. What we are doing is challenging you to grab hold of a more exciting option for your
teen years than the one portrayed as normal in society today.
This option has somehow gotten lost in our culture, and most

7

Do Hard Things TP_final_MASTER.template6x9 2/11/16 5:25 PM Page 8

rethinking the teen years

people don’t even know it. In the pages ahead, you’re going
to meet young people just like you who have rediscovered this
better way—a way to reach higher, dream bigger, grow
stronger, love and honor God, live with more joy—and quit
wasting their lives.
In Do Hard Things, we not only say there is a better way to
do the teen years, we show you how we and thousands of
other teens are doing it right now and how you can as well.

8

